Documentation on quantization (#565)
huggingface/optimum: docs/source/concept_guides/quantization.mdx

point (`float32`).

Reducing the number of bits means the resulting model requires less memory storage, consumes less energy (in theory), and
operations like matrix multiplication can be performed much faster with integer arithmetic. It also allows to run models
on embedded devices, which sometimes only support integer data types.

## The Theory

The basic idea behing quantization is quite easy: going from the regular 32-bit floating point representation for weights
and activations to a lower precision data type. The most considered lower precision data types are:

- `float16`, accumulation data type `float16`
- `int16`, accumulation data type `int32`
- `int8`, accumulation data type `int32`
- `int4`, accumulation data type `int32`
- `int1`, accumulation data type `int32`

The accumulation data type specifies the type of the result of accumulating (adding, multiplying, etc) values of the
data type in question. For examples, let's consider:

```
C = A x B
```

where `A` is a `m x n` matrix of `int8` values, and `B` is a `n x p` matrix of `int8` values.

Then for `i` in `[0, m - 1]` and `j` in `[0, p - 1]`, `C[i, j]` is an `int32` because it the sum of products of

> `int8` values.

Author: Done, thanks for the great suggestion!

> ### How do machines represent numbers?

Author: I assumed people would know those data types, but might not know how they work underneath, but I get your point, where should we put it in your opinion?

3. Quantization aware training: the range for each activation is computed at *training-time*, following the same idea
than post training static quantization. But "fake quantize" operators are used instead of observers: they record
values just as observers do, but they also simulate the error induced by quantization to let the model adapt on it.

For both post training static quantization and quantization aware training, it is necessary to define calibration
techniques, the most common are:

- Min-max: the computed range is `[min observed value, max observed value]`, this works well with weights.
- Moving average min-max: the computed range is `[moving average min observed value, moving average max observed value]`,
thiw works well with activations.
- Histogram: records a histogram of values along with min and max values, then chooses according to some criterion.
  - Entropy: the range is computed as the one minimizing the error between the full-precision and the quantized data.
  - Mean Square Error: the range is computed as the one minimizing the mean square error between the full-precision and

>   the quantized data.

Reviewer: Add percentile maybe?

Author: Done, can you validate that it is correct please?

Reviewer: Actually, according to what I see [here](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/2cb12caf9317f1ded37f6db125cb03ba99320c40/onnxruntime/python/tools/quantization/calibrate.py#L706) In ORT's source code, it seems that it's rather `[p/2% of the observed values are bigger than this one, p/2% of the observed value are smaller than this one]`.

Author: It depends on whether the scheme is symmetric or not, from what I could understand:

- When symmetric, only one value can be chosen since the range needs to be `[-a, a]` in the end. So `a` is the value so that p% of the people are smaller.
- When asymmetric, the idea is to have a range when p% of the people fall into, so we cut both ends by the p/2% of the people that do not fall.

Reviewer: Yeah the symmetric case is a bit different but I didn't want to make things more complicated :grin: 
Yep I understand it the same way as you do. Your explanation sounds good to me, no need to make the documentation too complicated here :+1:

common being the *two's complement*. For more information, you can check the
[Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signed_number_representations) on the subject.

#### Real numbers representation

Real numbers are usually represented with the following bit lengths: `16`, `32`, `64`.
The two main ways of representing real numbers are:

1. Fixed-point: there are fixed number of digits reserved for representing the integer part and the fractional part.
2. Floating-point: the number of digits for representing the integer and the fractional parts can vary.

The floating-point representation can represent bigger ranges of values, and this is the one we will be focusing on
since it is the most commonly used. There are three components in the floating-point representation:

1. The sign bit: this is the bit specifying the sign of the number.
2. The exponent part
  - 5 bits in `float16`
  - 8 bits in `bfloat16`
  - 8 bits in `float32`
  - 11 bits in `float64`
2. The mantissa
  - 11 bits in `float16` (10 explictly stored)
  - 8 bits in `bfloat16` (7 explicitly stored)
  - 24 bits in `float32` (23 explictly stored)
  - 53 bits in `float64` (52 explictly stored)

> 

Reviewer 2: I feel that this part could be clearer if we use directly an illustration.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we shall add fp8 as there are two formats could be too complicated here.

For more information on the bits allocation for each data type, check the nice illustration on the Wikipedia page about
the [bfloat16 floating-point format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bfloat16_floating-point_format).

For a real number `x` we have:

```
x = sign x mantissa x (2^exponent)
```

### Quantization

The two most common quantization cases are `float32 -> float16` and `float32 -> int8`.

> #### Quantization to `float16`

Reviewer 3: As float8 becomes more common (e.g. support in Trainium, Inferentia), I add it here, feel free to ignore if you feel it's irrelevant.

```suggestion
#### Quantization to `float16`, `float8`
```

> Performing quantization to go from `float32` to `float16` is quite straightforward since both data types follow the same

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Performing quantization to go from `float32` to lower precision floating point formats (as `float16` and `float8`) is quite straightforward since both data types follow the same
```

> representation scheme. The questions to ask yourself when quantizing an operation to `float16` are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
representation scheme. The questions to ask yourself when quantizing an operation to a lower precision float format:
```

> - Does my operation have a `float16` implementation?

Reviewer 2: I feel like float8 is not quite relevant for Optimum, it is not supported by ONNX Runtime, does Gaudi support it @regisss ?
(Maybe add fp87 as it is a general guide and point out that it is really limited for device like Hopper, Trainium...)

- Does my hardware suport `float16`? For instance, Intel CPUs [have been supporting `float16` as a storage type, but
computation is done after converting to `float32`](https://scicomp.stackexchange.com/a/35193). Full support will come
in Cooper Lake and Sapphire Rapids.
- Is my operation sensitive to lower precision?
For instance the value of epsilon in `LayerNorm` is usually very small (~ `1e-12`), but the smallest representable value in
`float16` is ~ `6e-5`, this can cause `NaN` issues.  The same applies for big values.

> #### Quantization to `int8`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Quantization to integer format (typically `int8`)
```

Performing quantization to go from `float32` to `int8` is more tricky. Only 256 values can be represented in `int8`,
while `float32` can represent a very wide range of values. The idea is to find the best way to project our range `[a, b]`
of `float32` values  to the `int8` space.

Let's consider a float `x` in `[a, b]`, then we can write the following quantization scheme, also called the *affine
quantization scheme*:

```
x = S * (x_q - Z)
```

where:

- `x_q` is the quantized `int8` value associated to `x`
- `S` and `Z` are the quantization parameters
  - `S` is the scale, and is a positive `float32`
  - `Z` is called the zero-point, it is the `int8` value corresponding to the value `0` in the `float32` realm. This is
  important to be able to represent exactly the value `0` because it is used everywhere throughout machine learning
  models.

The quantized value `x_q` of `x` in `[a, b]` can be computed as follows:

```
x_q = round(x/S + Z)
```

And `float32` values outside of the `[a, b]` range are clipped to the closest representable value, so for any
floating-point number `x`:

```

> x_q = clip(round(x/S + Z), round(a/S + Z), round(b/S + Z))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
x_q = clamp(x_q, min_representable_value, max_representable_value)
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, in the case of int8 quantization, `min_representable_value = -127`, `max_representable_value = 128.

```

```

This is called the *affine quantization sheme* because the mapping from `[a, b]` to `int8` is an affine one.

> A common special case of this scheme is the *scale quantization scheme*, where we consider a symmetric range of float values `[-a, a]`.

Reviewer 3: I never read this term. To me what this paragraph describes is symmetric vs asymmetric no?

In this case the integer space is usally `[-127, 127]`, meaning that the `-128` is opted out of the regular `[-128, 127]` signed `int8` range.
The reason being that having both ranges symmetric allows to have `Z = 0`. While one value out of the 256 representable
values is lost, it can provide a speedup since a lot of addition operations can be skipped.

**Note**: To learn how the quantization parameters `S` and `Z` are computed, you can read the
[Quantization and Training of Neural Networks for Efficient Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05877)
paper, or [Lei Mao's blog post](https://leimao.github.io/article/Neural-Networks-Quantization) on the subject.

> #### Number of quantization parameters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Per-tensor, per-channel, and group-wise quantization
```

Depending on the accuracy / latency trade-off you are targetting you can play with the granularity of the quantization parameters:

- Quantization parameters can be computed on a *per-tensor* basis, meaning that one pair of `(S, Z)` will be used per
tensor.
- Quantization parameters can be computed on a *per-channel* basis, meaning that it is possible to store a pair of
`(S, Z)` per element along one of the dimensions of a tensor. For example for a tensor of shape `[N, C, H, W]`, having
*per-channel* quantization parameters for the second dimension would result in having `C` pairs of `(S, Z)`. While this
can give a better accuracy, it requires more memory.

> #### Calibration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Dynamic and static quantization
```

The section above described how quantization from `float32` to `int8` works, but one question
remains: how is the `[a, b]` range of `float32` values determined? That is where calibration comes in to play.

Calibration is the step during quantization where the `float32` ranges are computed. For weights it is quite easy since

> the actual range is know at *quantization-time*. But it is less clear for activations, and different approaches exist:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the actual range can be known and computed in advance before runtime. But it is less clear for activations, and different approaches exist:
```

> 1. Post training dynamic quantization: the range for each activation is computed at *runtime*. While this gives great

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Dynamic quantization: the range for each activation is computed at *runtime*. While this gives great
```

> results without too much work, it can be a bit slower than static quantization because the range is computed each time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
results without too much work, it can be a bit slower than static quantization because over the overhead introduced of computing the range each time.
```

It is also not an option on certain hardware.

> 2. Post training static quantization: the range for each activation is computed at *quantization-time*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Static quantization: the range for each activation is computed at *quantization-time*.
```

>   - Observers are put on activations to record their values.
>   - A certain number of forward passes on a calibration dataset is done (around `200` examples is enough).
>   - The ranges for each computation are computed according to some *calibration technique*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Observers are put on activations to record their values.
    * A certain number of forward passes on a calibration dataset is done (around `200` examples is enough).
    * The ranges for each computation are computed according to some *calibration technique*.
```

3. Quantization aware training: the range for each activation is computed at *training-time*, following the same idea
than post training static quantization. But "fake quantize" operators are used instead of observers: they record
values just as observers do, but they also simulate the error induced by quantization to let the model adapt to it.

For both post training static quantization and quantization aware training, it is necessary to define calibration

> techniques, the most common are:

Author: Why not keep this?

- Min-max: the computed range is `[min observed value, max observed value]`, this works well with weights.
- Moving average min-max: the computed range is `[moving average min observed value, moving average max observed value]`,
thiw works well with activations.
- Histogram: records a histogram of values along with min and max values, then chooses according to some criterion.
  - Entropy: the range is computed as the one minimizing the error between the full-precision and the quantized data.
  - Mean Square Error: the range is computed as the one minimizing the mean square error between the full-precision and
  the quantized data.
  - Percentile: the range is computed using a given percentile value `p` on the observed values. The idea is to try to have
  `p%` of the observed values in the computed range. While this is possible when doing affine quantization, it is not always
  possible to exactly match that when doing symmetric quantization. You can check [how it is done in ONNX
  Runtime](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/2cb12caf9317f1ded37f6db125cb03ba99320c40/onnxruntime/python/tools/quantization/calibrate.py#L698)
  for more details.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

#### Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) and Post-Training Quantization (PTQ)

There are two main strategies when it comes to *when to perform quantization*:

* **Post-training quantization:** No retraining is involved. The original trained full precision model is used, and quantization is applied on top. In both dynamic and static quantization, the quantization parameters for the weights are pre-computed before inference, and weights can be stored as `int8`. Activations are quantized on the fly during inference in the case of dynamic quantization, while static quantization precomputes the quantization ranges using a calibration dataset.
* **Quantization-aware training:**  The range for weights and activations are computed at *training-time*, following the same idea than post training static quantization. But "fake quantize" operators are used instead of observers: they record alues just as observers do, but they also **simulate the error induced by quantization during training** to let the model adapt to it.
```

#### Pratical steps to follow to quantize a model to `int8`

> To effectively quantize a model to `int8`, the steps to follow are:

Reviewer 3: probably the tradeoff speed / prediction quality should be highlighted here.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9808326/207072097-27e7d71b-5a92-4df4-abb8-e75df9131e99.png)

1. Choose which operators to quantize. Good operators to quantize are the one dominating it terms of computation time,
for instance linear projections and matrix multiplications.
2. Try dynamic quantization, if it is fast enough stop here, otherwise continue to step 3.

> 3. Apply observers to your models in places where you want to quantize. It implies defining which quantization scheme to use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. In 3., 4., 5., try post-training static quantization that can be faster than dynamic quantization, but is harder to maintain prediction quality. Apply observers to your models in places where you want to quantize. It implies defining which quantization scheme to use.
```
